APPENDIX E
Your First AI-Assisted Project
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

If you have read this far and you are new to AI-assisted development,
this appendix is for you. It is a concrete first step — something you
can do right now, in the next hour, to start building with AI.

If you are an experienced developer who already knows the tools, you
can skip this appendix. Think of it as a BASIC GOTO statement — jump
straight to the next one. This is for the person who just installed
their first AI coding tool and is staring at a blank prompt.


Before You Start: Version Control

You need version control. This is not optional. The AI will sometimes
break things that were working. When that happens, you want to be able
to go back to the last known-good state instantly, rather than spending
tokens and frustration trying to coax the AI into restoring something
it just destroyed.

If you don't already use Git, set it up now. You don't need to know
everything about Git. You need to know three things:

1. How to create a repository: git init
2. How to save your work: git add . && git commit -m "describe what changed"
3. How to go back: git checkout . (undo unstaged changes) or git reset
   --hard HEAD (go back to the last commit)

That's it. Do this before every significant direction change. Do it
when something works. Do it when you're about to ask the AI for a big
refactor. The commit history is your undo stack. Build the habit on day
one.

If you are using an AI coding tool that has an auto-commit feature,
enable it. If your tool asks you to approve every change before it is
applied — YOLO mode is better. The approval step is theatre. You haven't
read the code and you won't read the code. The real verification happens
after the change is applied, when you test the behavior. If it's wrong,
you revert. Accept the change, test it, and only then decide if it was
correct.


Step One: Describe Your First Feature

Open your AI coding tool. Describe what you want to build. Do not
describe how to build it. Describe what the user should experience.

A good description:

  "Build a website that shows a list of my favourite albums. Each album
  should show the cover art, the artist name, and the release year. When
  I click an album, it should show the track list. I should be able to
  add new albums by typing the title and artist."

A bad description:

  "Create a React app with a component called AlbumList that fetches
  data from an API endpoint. Use useState and useEffect. Style it with
  Tailwind."

The AI knows how to build things. Your job is to say what to build.
Let the AI choose the stack, the architecture, and the implementation.
If the AI chooses something you don't like, you can redirect it later.
Start with the outcome.

Commit. Always commit after the initial scaffold works.


Step Two: Test It

Run the application. Click the buttons. Navigate the pages. Try to break
it. What happens when you add an album with no title? What happens when
you click an album that has no tracks? What happens when you reload the
page?

You are doing manual QA. This is the most important skill in AI-assisted
development. You do not need to know how the code works. You need to
know whether the behavior matches your description. If it does, good.
If it doesn't, go to step three.

Commit when you're satisfied that the feature works.


Step Three: Argue

Something is wrong. The track list doesn't show up. The cover art is
broken. The new album form doesn't clear after submitting.

Describe exactly what you did, what you expected, and what actually
happened:

  "I added a new album called 'Dark Side of the Moon' by Pink Floyd.
  I expected it to appear in the album list. It didn't appear. I
  refreshed the page and it's still not there. The form cleared after
  I submitted, which looked like it worked, but the album is missing."

The AI will propose an explanation. Read it. Does it make sense? Does
it account for everything you observed? If not, push back:

  "You said the form submission failed, but the form cleared after I
  submitted. If the submission failed, why did the form clear?"

Argue until the AI reaches an explanation that accounts for all the
evidence. Then tell it to fix the problem. Test again. Commit.


Step Four: Add Your First Invariant

After the fix works, add a sensor that prevents this problem from
recurring:

  "Write a script that checks whether the album creation form
  successfully persists new albums to the database and returns them
  in the album list. Run it before every deployment."

The AI will write the script. Run it. It should pass on the current
code. If someone (or the AI) later introduces a change that breaks
album creation, this script will catch it before it reaches you.

You now have a verification surface. It is one script. It checks one
thing. But it is a permanent guarantee that this specific class of
failure can never recur without detection.

This is the entire paradigm in miniature. Describe a feature. Test it
manually. When it breaks, argue with the AI. Fix it. Add an invariant.
Repeat. Each cycle makes the system more reliable. Each invariant is
technical credit that compounds.

You do not need thirty invariants to start. You need one. You just
built it.


Step Five: Keep Going

The next feature will be easier. Some of the things that went wrong
last time are now guarded by the invariant you just added. The AI will
generate code under a slightly tighter set of constraints. You will
spend less time arguing and more time shipping.

This is the compounding effect. It works at any scale. One invariant
is infinitely better than zero. Two is better than one. The surface
grows with every incident, and every addition makes the next feature
cheaper to verify.

You are now doing directed AI analysis. You may still call it vibe
coding. The label doesn't matter. What matters is that you are building,
testing, arguing, and adding guarantees — in that order, in every cycle.
The open field is open. Go build something.
